nixos/systemd: Implement reload triggers (#157329)
NixOS/nixpkgs: nixos/doc/manual/development/activation-script.section.md

# Activation script {#sec-activation-script}

The activation script is a bash script called to activate the new
configuration which resides in a NixOS system in `$out/activate`. Since its

> contents are dependant on your system configuration, the contents may differ.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
contents depend on your system configuration, the contents may differ.
```

This chapter explains how the script works in general, and some common NixOS
snippets. Please be aware that the script is executed on every boot and system
switch, so tasks that can be performed in other places should be performed

> there (for example creating a directory for service in the `preStart` of the
> service).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
there (for example creating directories for services in the service definition itself, either via systemd's `StateDirectory`, or `preStart`).
```

Let's make it more clear where this should happen, and encourage StateDirectory over PreStart.

above. This means that the activation script will "fake" a modified unit file
and `switch-to-configuration` will act accordingly. By doing so, configuration
like [systemd.services.\<name\>.restartIfChanged](#opt-systemd.services) is
respected. Since the activation script is run **after** services are already
stopped, [systemd.services.\<name\>.stopIfChanged](#opt-systemd.services)
cannot be taken into account anymore and the unit is always restarted.

The files that can be written to are `/run/nixos/activation-restart-list` and
`/run/nixos/activation-reload-list` with their respective counterparts for
dry activation being `/run/nixos/dry-activation-restart-list` and
`/run/nixos/dry-activation-reload-list`. Units can be written there as newline-
separated lists where duplicates are ignored.

## NixOS snippets {#sec-activation-script-nixos-snippets}

There are some snippets NixOS enables by default because disabling them would
most likely break you system. This section lists a few of them and what they
do:

- `binsh` creates `/bin/sh` which points to the runtime shell
- `etc` sets up the contents of `/etc`, this includes systemd units and

>   excludes `/etc/passwd`, `/etc/group`, and `/etc/shadow` which are managed by
>   the `users` snippet

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  excludes `/etc/passwd`, `/etc/group`, and `/etc/shadow` 9which are managed by
  the `users` snippet).
```

above. This means that the activation script will "fake" a modified unit file
and `switch-to-configuration` will act accordingly. By doing so, configuration
like [systemd.services.\<name\>.restartIfChanged](#opt-systemd.services) is
respected. Since the activation script is run **after** services are already
stopped, [systemd.services.\<name\>.stopIfChanged](#opt-systemd.services)
cannot be taken into account anymore and the unit is always restarted.

The files that can be written to are `/run/nixos/activation-restart-list` and
`/run/nixos/activation-reload-list` with their respective counterparts for
dry activation being `/run/nixos/dry-activation-restart-list` and
`/run/nixos/dry-activation-reload-list`. Units can be written there as newline-
separated lists where duplicates are ignored.

## NixOS snippets {#sec-activation-script-nixos-snippets}

There are some snippets NixOS enables by default because disabling them would
most likely break you system. This section lists a few of them and what they
do:

- `binsh` creates `/bin/sh` which points to the runtime shell
- `etc` sets up the contents of `/etc`, this includes systemd units and

>   excludes `/etc/passwd`, `/etc/group`, and `/etc/shadow` (which are managed by

Author: I think it's necessary to mention these because these are files where I think it's overly likely they get inspected by a interested user.

`/etc/hostname` is managed by the `etc` snippet.
